Alright so, continuing on from the last video,
when we're looking at a raise in casting, et cetera.
In this one, we're going to show some more
examples of castings with and without generics.
So we haven't discussed generics
and they are officially art of the second Java exam,
the 1Z0-816 certification exam,
but you might encounter some sample code
in the first exam, this one that we're focusing on
that uses generics.
The term generics is used because its purpose was
to implement more generic programming,
extending Javas type system to allow a quote,
a type or method to operate on objects of various types
while providing compile-time type safety, end quote.
Now from the example code we walked through
in the previous video the objective there would be
to prevent adding a StringBuilder object in a collection,
we wanna contain only NextClass objects,
by having the compiler recognise the problem
and flag it as an error rather than waiting till runtime.
The Java collections framework
supports generics to specify the type of objects
stored in a collection instance.
A generic type in Java is one that is parameterized,
with in the case of collections,
the type of the objects which will be in the collection.
You can parameterize any class or interface
as well as methods. Now I'm not gonna to discuss
how to create a generically typed type,
or a generically typed method.
For this exercise,
all you need to know is the syntax of using one.
So the syntax for declaring a variable
for a generic type and instantiating it is shown below.
So we've got a generic type name, diamond operator,
and a type in the diamond operator, varname equals new,
the generic type name again, diamond operator and the type,
left and right parentheses.
And the example I'm using there is ArrayList,
diamond operator,
String again being the type that we're declaring,
list equals new ArrayList, diamond operator string,
then we've got our left and right parenthesis,
semicolon to end the line.
So alternately what you can do is omit
the specific passed type on the right of the assignment,
and just use the diamond operator.
And this is short hand and can be used
because the type is known from the declaration.
And the example there, as you can see,
it's almost identical but we're not using
the type on the right hand side,
we've just got the diamond operator
that's empty in this scenario.
So both of these statements declare a variable
of ArrayList, which will house only String objects,
and assign a new instance of an ArrayList,
typed to String, to the variable.
We'll be talking a lot more about the ArrayList,
but for now realise it's an object that implements
the List interface, and maintains an array.
The only other thing you need
to know about generics at this level,
is that they don't support primitive data types.
The full on code below is invalid.
ArrayList, diamond operator int, list equals new ArrayList,
diamond operator int, invalid code.
There are actually two types of ArrayList,
the raw, pre-generics ArrayList and the typed ArrayList.
And this is true of many of the Collections classes
and interfaces in Java, so let's compare them side by side.
We need to create a new class now
in our polymorphism project.
We're gonna call this one GenericCasts.
Now this code you'll probably recognise is very similar
to the cast extras class from the previous video.
We've still got the two nested classes there,
base class and next class, next class extending base class.
But moving down to the main list,
to the main methods rather, we're creating an ArrayList,
both raw and typed as you can see there.
The raw types are the type that are moving on down.
We've got our typed generic lists there,
and with our typed ArrayList you can see we're creating
an ArrayList of type BaseClass,
and creating a list of BaseClass as well as the ArrayList.
We're adding a NextClass object to the raw ArrayList
as you can see on line 52,
and doing the same for our topped ArrayList
and we're printing out the ArrayList and list variables.
So let's run this code.
You can see the output down at the bottom.
So far we don't see a whole lot of difference between
a raw ArrayList and a generic ArrayList,
but let's expand this a bit further.
Gonna add some code to the bottom of the main method.
Now here's where the difference lies.
Defining an ArrayList of type BaseClass
informs the compiler that adding anything
that doesn't pass the IZ test for BaseClass is an error,
and we did get a compiler error on the second end statement.
And obviously in the case of the raw list,
it would quite happy to accept it.
So I'm just going to comment that out.
Now I'm gonna paste in some more code
on the bottom of the main methods.
So here you can see we're creating
a next class object and we're assigning it
to both the NextClass and BaseClassed variables.
Then I'm creating a NextClass typed ArrayList,
and assigning it to the raw ArrayList variable,
and the raw list variable.
I don't think there's any real surprises there.
You can assign a specifically typed ArrayList
and list to a raw type ArrayList lists.
Everything compiled, you can see there's no errors there.
And we can run it even though
we haven't defined any extra output.
And it still works.
Alright, so let's add a couple extra lines of the output.
And we have got errors there and you can BaseList,
here is our variable of ArrayList BaseClass.
And bList is our variable list of BaseClass.
So starting in our ArrayList
of type NextClass object to a variable of ArrayList
BaseClass is a compiler error,
although we're starting a NextClass object
to a BaseClass variable isn't.
And the same is true for a list of typed BaseClass.
It's a compiler error,
to an ArrayList of type NextClass objects.
And we hover over the arrow there,
incompatible types as you can see there.
Alright, so I'm gonna remove that last segment of code.
We'll comment it out.
Now that's a little confusing,
and the explanation has to do with type erasure
and backwards compatibility for raw types
and we can't really get into that here.
Now let's see if the same incongruent
behaviour is true of method codes.
SO we're gonna add a method to our NextClass class.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So there's the method and note there
that the parameter type is a list of BaseClass objects.
Alright, so let's go down to the bottom
of the main method and there add some test code.
And I need to add these imports
and these are obviously two of our nested classes.
So you can see they're calling an object
of ArrayList NextClass objects is a compiler error,
a can't resolved method.
All right so we're gonna remove that last error code,
last testIt, all right so lets have a look,
and do a casting test now.
I'm gonna put some more code in here.
Now there's the code, this code is demonstrating
a casting encounters to the same compiler error.
So we've still got an issue with inconvertible types there.
Alright so what did we actually learn here?
Well first that you can assign a typed generic object
to a raw variable type.
But you can't use the 'Is A' test for casting,
calling methods or assignments of a parameterized type.
An exact match to the parameterized type is required.
Alright, so I'm just going to write,
comment out that last, those last three errors.
And I'm gonna paste in one final
bit of code before we end the video.
Okay, so there's the code.
I'm just going to put it up on the screen a bit higher.
This code's demonstrating that using
type ArrayList objects removes the requirement
to cast elements before accessing them.
So I've actually run this code now.
You can see we're getting
the results that we'd expect there.
So in the last two videos we've reviewed
casting examples around arrays and generics
and we've learned that a subclass is a superclass,
but an array of subclass, subclass array,
cannot be said to be an array
of superclass for casting decisions.
And a generic type to a subclass also cannot be used
in place of a generic type to its superclass.
So let's end the video here.
Next you'll see a short quiz
and then we'll move on to section ten
and that's all about programming
abstractly through interfaces soon in the upcoming video.